
1. Diabetes Technol Ther. 2008 Jun;10(3):160-8. doi: 10.1089/dia.2008.0283.

WellDoc mobile diabetes management randomized controlled trial: change in
clinical and behavioral outcomes and patient and physician satisfaction.

Quinn CC(1), Clough SS, Minor JM, Lender D, Okafor MC, Gruber-Baldini A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gerontology, Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
cquinn@epi.umaryland.edu

BACKGROUND: Less than 63% of individuals with diabetes meet professional
guidelines target of hemoglobin A1c <7.0%, and only 7% meet combined glycemic,
lipid, and blood pressure goals. The primary study aim was to assess the impact
on A1c of a cell phone-based diabetes management software system used with
web-based data analytics and therapy optimization tools. Secondary aims examined 
health care provider (HCP) adherence to prescribing guidelines and assessed HCPs'
adoption of the technology.
METHODS: Thirty patients with type 2 diabetes were recruited from three community
physician practices for a 3-month study and evenly randomized. The intervention
group received cell phone-based software designed by endocrinologists and CDEs
(WellDoc Communications, Inc., Baltimore, MD). The software provided real-time
feedback on patients' blood glucose levels, displayed patients' medication
regimens, incorporated hypo- and hyperglycemia treatment algorithms, and
requested additional data needed to evaluate diabetes management. Patient data
captured and transferred to secure servers were analyzed by proprietary
statistical algorithms. The system sent computer-generated logbooks (with
suggested treatment plans) to intervention patients' HCPs.
RESULTS: The average decrease in A1c for intervention patients was 2.03%,
compared to 0.68% (P < 0.02, one-tailed) for control patients. Of the
intervention patients, 84% had medications titrated or changed by their HCP
compared to controls (23%, P = 0.002). Intervention patients' HCPs reported the
system facilitated treatment decisions, provided organized data, and reduced
logbook review time.
CONCLUSIONS: Adults with type 2 diabetes using WellDoc's software achieved
statistically significant improvements in A1c. HCP and patient satisfaction with 
the system was clinically and statistically significant.

PMID: 18473689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

